## Abstract

This project explores how and why prisoners’ movements emerge in some contexts but not in others. Through a comparative study of political prisoner movements in Egypt and Palestine, I theorize prisons as unique ecologies of contention in which the emergence of prisoners’ movements is contingent upon the social and political opportunity structure and particularly the way prisoners are perceived and their roles are framed within their respective movements and societies. To validate this theory, I employ a novel empirical strategy, using various Natural Language Processing techniques, including topic modeling and embedding regressions, to analyze letters from Egyptian and Palestinian political prisoners. This methodology allows for a nuanced understanding of how prisoners perceive their detention and the influence of external political contexts. Findings suggest that variation in movement emergence are in fact related to differences in political environments outside of the prison, with Palestinian detainees more likely to connect their detention with the broader national movement. This project presents two contributions to the social movements literature. Firstly, this project will add to the literature on prisons as sites of contentious politics. Secondly, this project adds to our understanding of the structural factors that cause movements to emerge, underscoring the importance of external political dynamics and internal resistance narratives. Additionally, the use of this methodology demonstrates how machine learning techniques can be used to take advantage of unstructured data in low-information environments.

## Embeddings
In addition to the code in the repo this project makes use of the fast text embeddings and accompanying transformation matrix provided by Rodriguez, Spirling, Stewart, and Wirsching (2024) here: https://alcembeddings.org/alcdata 

